979-8-3503-2445-7/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE
Recent Artificial Intelligence Advances in Detection
and Diagnosis of Sickle Cell Disease: A review
1st Abdourahmane Balde
Assane Seck University
Ziguinchor, Senegal
a.b165@zig.univ.sn
2nd Avewe Bassene
Cheikh Anta Diop University
Dakar, Senegal
avewe.bassene@ucad.edu.sn
3rd Lamine Faty
Assane Seck University
Ziguinchor, Senegal
lamine.faty@univ-zig.sn
4th Mamadou Soumboundou
Iba Der Thiam University
Thies, Senegal
mamadou.soumboundou@univthies.sn
5th Ousmane Sall
Cheikh Hamidou Kane Digital
University
Dakar, Senegal
ousmane1.sall@unchk.edu.sn
6th Youssou Faye
Assane Seck University
Ziguinchor, Senegal
yfaye@univ-zig.sn
Abstract— Sickle cell anemia is a genetic disease characterized
by a genuine alteration of hemoglobin that leads to the emergence
of sickle-shaped red blood cells. The clinical diagnosis of sickle cell
disease is based on blood analysis tests such as electrophoresis,
chromatography and isoelectric focusing, blood count scanning or
peripheral blood smears. These analyses aim to identify the
presence of the hemoglobin S (HbS) in the sickle cell patient's
blood. Nonetheless, these approaches face limitations linked to
processing delays, substantial expenses, the need for specialized
expertise, and inaccessibility in developing countries, where the
prevalence of sickle cell disease is substantial. Thus, artificial
intelligence techniques, including medical image segmentation and
machine learning algorithms, offer innovative solutions to address
these challenges. This paper gives an overview of recent advances
related to image segmentation, feature extraction as well as
classification approaches used in the detection and diagnosis of
sickle cell disease. We introduced both computer vision
techniques, machine learning and convolutional neural networks
for sickle cell detection in microscopic images of blood smear. We
discuss specific challenges related to segmentation methods while
processing microscopic images containing overlapping cells. In
addition, we examined challenges related to the robustness of
convolutional neural network models used for feature extraction
and then classification of sickle cells images. To conclude this
paper, research prospects that can be explored in the future
related to sickle cell detection in medical concerns are given.
Keywords—sickle cell detection, segmentation, classification,
convolutional neural network, diagnostic.
I. INTRODUCTION
Sickle cell disease (SCD) is a genetic disease that affects the
hemoglobin present in red blood cells [1]. When a person has
SCD, the hemoglobin beta-globin gene is altered and the red
blood cells change shape and become sickle-shaped when
deoxygenated [2]. Polymerization and sickling of red blood cells
leads to permanent creation of cells called sickled cells [3]. This
morphologic alteration triggers cell destruction and shortens
their lifespan, leading to hemolytic anemia [4]. Symptoms
associated with sickle cell disease include anemia, episodes of
pain, hand and foot syndrome, increasing infections, failure to
thrive, and vision problems [5]. These symptoms also call for
several complications, including stroke, acute chest syndrome,
pulmonary hypertension, leg ulcer [6].
SCD is one of the most common and widespread hereditary
hematological disorders in the world [7] with approximately
300,000 babies that are born with sickle cell disease each year
[8]. SCD exhibits a higher prevalence in Africa, ranging from
10% to 40% [9]. In sub-Saharan Africa alone, it is estimated that
approximately 75% to 80% of people are carriers of the sickle
cell gene [9]. Regarding Senegal, about 10% of the population
is affected by SCD and each year, approximatively 1,700 infants
are delivered with the homozygous SS form [10]. Since 2006,
the World Health Organization (WHO) has recognized sickle
cell disease as a global public health problem [11].
The main challenge in diagnosing sickle cell disease lies in
the accurate detection and counting of sickle cells due to their
varied shapes and tendency to overlap in microscopic images
[12]. The traditional approach used by healthcare professionals
to detect sickle cell disease involves manually inspecting blood
smear samples from patients under a microscope. As described
in [13]–[15], this process is time-consuming and can be prone to
errors due to overlapping red blood cells during the observation
process. In addition, it requires the presence of a qualified
hematologist, which may be difficult to find in some areas
affected by the disease.
The use of artificial intelligence (AI) techniques, such as
image processing methods and convolutional neural network
models, offers fresh opportunities for enhancing sickle cell
disease detection. These approaches are able to efficiently
analyze microscopic images, including overlapping cells,
allowing for more accurate detection and counting of sickle cells
[16]. In recent years, AI has generated great enthusiasm inmedical research and has found numerous applications [17]. Due
to enhanced computing power, vast data availability, and
progress in machine learning, AI has become a valuable assistive
technology in many fields, particularly in medical imaging [18].
Work has been conducted in the field of healthcare to highlight
the positive impacts of using AI on the diagnosis, prevention,
and treatment of various diseases [19]. The AI techniques are
increasingly integrated into clinical diagnosis and treatment of
hematological diseases, including sickle cell disease [20].
This review aims to explore AI techniques that emphasis
image segmentation methods and machine learning algorithms,
to precisely detect and diagnose SCD using microscopic images
of affected patients. In addition, we highlight the performance
limitations of these computer-based approaches when it comes
to SCD detection.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2
provides a state-of-the-art examination of recent artificial
intelligence methods for sickle cell disease diagnosis. Current
challenges identified in sickle cell disease detection are
presented in Section 3. Finally, section 4 summarizes the paper
and gives avenues of research to explore in perspective.
II. ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE METHODS FOR DETECTING
SICKLE CELL DISEASE
Fig. 1. Microscopic blood sample image of a patient with
sickle cell disease
The traditional approach of identifying and counting sickle
cells used in healthcare concerning diagnosing SCD is timeconsuming, expensive and requires the intervention of a
specialized physician. A tedious task that calls for several
propositions based on AI techniques that aim to improve the
manual processes of diagnosing SCD. The sickle cell disease
detection methods based on AI techniques can be grouped into
three categories: image segmentation and feature extraction
methods, classification methods based on machine learning
algorithms, and deep learning (DL) based SCD detection. This
section reviews works related to SCD in the scientific literature.
It provides an overview of recent studies and advances in the
medical field, it highlights the strengths and weaknesses of each
SCD detection method using microscopic images. All proposals
abstracted in this paper are widely based on the analysis of
datasets containing microscopic images of patients with SCD,
as illustrated in Fig. 1. In Fig. 1., we can observe the shape and
arrangement of blood cells used to train AI algorithms to detect
and diagnose SCD.
The state-of-the-art reviews were conducted using Google
Scholar to identify primary literature in sickle cell disease
detection. The proposals published from 2015 were included in
these papers, without any language restrictions. In addition,
databases were also integrated into the exploration strategy,
including PubMed, Scopus, ArXiv, Embase. The following
terms were used as keywords: artificial intelligence, machine
learning, deep learning, convolutional neural networks, image
segmentation, feature extraction, sickle cell disease, red blood
cell, hematology, diagnosis, detection, classification.
The selected papers were chosen based on criteria related to:
• the publication date of the paper (the latest from
2015)
• the used artificial intelligence approaches (image
segmentation, features extraction)
• the metrics used to evaluate the paper in terms of
performance (accuracy, sensitivity, execution
time)
• the usefulness of the proposed method when it
comes to diagnosis and treatment of sickle cell
disease
A. Segmentation and Feature Extraction Methods
Detecting and counting sickle cells in blood smear
microscopic images is challenging for sickle cell disease
diagnosis due to their varied shapes and potential overlap in the
images. The methods used by healthcare professionals to
identify and count cells have several limitations. To automate
this process with improvement in accuracy, various image
segmentation and feature extraction techniques have been
applied to diagnose SCD. This part focuses on image
segmentation and features extraction methods that have been
used on blood smear microscopic images.
Menika et al. [21] proposed a method to detect and count
sickle cells using image processing techniques and fractal
dimension. The first step in this method was to collect blood
smear images using a camera connected to a microscope. Then,
a preprocessing step was undertaken, consisting of applying a
median filter to the original images in order to reduce noise.
After that, the red blood cells are segmented through edge
detection algorithm and K-means algorithm to identify normal
cells and sickled cells. The shape features of sickle cells are
extracted based on their fractal dimensions to distinguish them
from other cell shapes. In a final step, bounding boxes are used
to detect and count sickle cells present in the image. This study
shows that the image segmentation techniques used as well as
the fractal dimension provide good results for the detection and
counting of sickle cells. However, the edge detection algorithm
is less effective in dealing with overlapping cells.
Chintawar et al. [22] proposed an image processing
technique involving denoising and segmentation to discern the
shape and size of red blood cells in sickle cell patients' blood.
This method makes it possible to identify and quantify sickle
cells among the 12 types of cells examined in the blood of a
sickle cell patient. The proposed workflow consists of first
acquiring microscopic images in RGB format from sickle cellpatients. This collection step is followed by the preprocessing
step, where the original images are converted to grayscale. The
grayscale images are filtered to attenuate impulse noise. Then,
the edge detection algorithm is used to segment the cells in these
images. This segmentation technique helps to define the
boundaries of each cell so that cell borders, structures and
contours are distinguished in the image. Finally, features such as
circularity and color combined with the number of cells for each
type are calculated. This framework can identify and assess the
percentage of each cell type by considering the distinctive
features of each type among the 12 cell types under scrutiny.
However, the drawback was that the method is unable to deal
with overlapping cells efficiently and the number of features
used to categorize a cell is limited.
Abduraheem et al. [23] use two segmentation algorithms,
such as Circular Hough Transform (CHT) and Watershed
algorithm to automatically detect sickle cell disease. Both
algorithms were implemented to extract circularity features from
cells and determine the shape of overlapped cells in the images.
A dataset of 233 microscopic images from sickle cell patients
was used in this study. The CHT algorithm was more efficient
when it comes to computing delay to distinguish normal cells
from sickle cells in images. It requires a processing time of 8.71
seconds to classify cell types, while the Watershed algorithm
takes 11.74 seconds to perform the same task. These methods
were suggested for automating sickle cell disease diagnosis, and
the findings demonstrate their significant potential for
hematologists.
Sharma et al. [24] proposed a segmentation and feature
extraction method with the aim of distinguishing normal cells,
sickle cells, dracocytes and ovalycytes using the watershed
segmentation algorithm. They collected 100 sample images of
blood cells in which four classes weree identified. The quality of
the acquired blood smear microscopic images is first improved
by the median filter algorithm. The watershed algorithm is then
used to segment cells and extract morphological features, such
as the metric value, aspect ratio and radial signature of each cell.
Thus, extracted features are subjected to the KNN classifier to
distinguish the four cell types, which had an accuracy of 80.6%.
This method has the advantage of detecting cell types other than
sickle cells. However, the Watershed algorithm requires more
computation time because it requires filling at in all local minima
in the image to effectively separate overlapping cells.
Bheem et al. [25] proposed a method that involves image
preprocessing, segmentation, feature extraction and
classification of red blood cells in order to diagnose SCD. In the
preprocessing phase, RGB images from the erythrocyte IDB1
[26] dataset are converted to grayscale, and the median filter is
utilized to eliminate noise and enhance image quality. In the
segmentation step, the authors first used Otsu thresholding to
separate the cell type from the rest of the image. Then, we
employed the Watershed segmentation algorithm to separate
overlapping cells and assign labels to each cell type.
Morphological closing eliminates undesired objects in
segmented images. Following this, cell features, encompassing
geometric and statistical attributes, are extracted, including
circularity, aspect ratio, eccentricity, Standard Deviation,
Variance, Entropy, and energy. Finally, the extracted features
are fed into classifiers for the classification of the three cell
types. The RF classifier exhibited 92% accuracy in classifying
the three cell types using morphological features, surpassing
SVM, RF, and RL algorithms. This study demonstrates that
combining Otsu thresholding and the Watershed algorithm
efficiently handles overlapping cells, enabling the extraction of
additional cell properties. However, the Watershed algorithm
requires a significant amount of computing time to effectively
separate overlapped cells, which makes this method expensive.
In the work of Mohamed et al. [26], the Sobel filter is used
to extract the shape of globules and determine whether the
diameter of a cell is less than 0.8um. The aim of this research is
to identify and differentiate between sickle cells and normal
cells. This approach has proven highly valuable, especially in
remote areas with limited medical access. However, it does not
specifically address the segmentation of overlapping cells,
potentially leading to incorrect detections.
B. Classification Methods Based on Machine Learning
Algorithms
The morphological features extracted from the blood cells
were used to classify sickle cells and other cell types in the
microscopic images using algorithms such as KNN (k-nearest
neighbors), SVM (support vector machine), NB (naive Bayes),
RL (logistic regression), DT (decision tree) deep learning
algorithms. Most of the extracted features from red blood cells
consist of the cell ratio aspect, circularity, entropy, variance,
eccentricity. These quantitative features then serve as an input
to classification algorithms to detect sickle cells and distinguish
them from other forms of red blood cells. This approach which
fuses image segmentation techniques and classification
algorithms, was used to effectively detect and classify SCD
with good performance. Sharma et al. [24] used the KNN
classifier to classify sickle cells, dracocytes, ovalocytes, and
healthy erythrocytes using the aspect ratio metric values and
radial signature of each cell as input variables. It achieves a
classification accuracy of 80.6% and a sensitivity of 86.4%. The
results show the KNN used is able to preserve cell information
in the learning phase. However, the KNN classifier requires
enormous computing time for large datasets and it is very
sensitive to outliers.
Sagar Yeruva et al. [27] compare SVM, KNN, RL and RF
classifiers accuracy while proposing a framework that classifies
SCD. The authors develop classifiers to dissociate sickle cells
from normal and thalassemia cells. They collected 1387 files of
sickle cell patients. Based on collected data, 13 features are
identified to train the classifiers. The SVM, KNN, RL and RF
classifiers had accuracies of 76%, 77%, 78%, 95% and 98%
respectively. The results show that the RF algorithm achieves
the best prediction accuracy in detecting sickle cell disease.
However, the performance of the SVM and KNN algorithm is
not optimal when applied to the test data.
Bheem Sen et al. [25] used four machine learning
algorithms to classify normal cells, sickle cells, and other cell
types of cells using features extracted from each type. Variables
used to train the classifiers include circularity, aspect ratio,
eccentricity, deviation, variance, entropy, and energy. The
objective of this research is to create a system that can
effectively recognize and categorize red blood cells, even when
they are superimposed. After training the algorithms, resultsshowed that RF obtained the best performance with an accuracy
of 92%. The Naïf Bayes (NB) algorithm obtains the lowest
precision with 88%. We also see that the RF adapts better to the
training data, recording sensitivity rates of 95%, 92% and 91%
in class 1, 2 and 3, respectively.
Alagus et al. [28] proposed a method for early identification
of sickle cell disease based on the Inception V3 model and the
SVM and KNN classifier from blood smear microscopic
images. The aim of this method is to facilitate the diagnosis of
sickle cell disease, particularly in children and women. The
images used in this study are collected from the public
“erythrocytes IDB”[29] database. The Inception V3 image
recognition model is used to extract features of normal cells and
sickle cells from images. The MO-BGWO optimization
algorithm is used to select relevant features. Then, KNN and
SVM classifiers are used to classify normal cells and sickle cells
based on the extracted features. Results give an accuracy of
99% and a sensitivity of 98%. The results of this study could
contribute to the early detection of sickle cell disease and
prevent possible serious complications.
Multilayer perceptron (MLP) was included in the work of
Yeruva et al. [30] for the diagnosis of sickle cell disease. This
model was subjected to validation which showed 99% accuracy
when classifying normal, sickle and thalassemia cells on the
validation dataset. The performance of the MLP classifier was
then compared to that of the SVM, KNN, RL, and RF classifiers
to evaluate the relative performance of each algorithm.
C. Extraction and Classification Methods BbBased on Deep
Learning
Recent work has mainly focused on the use of deep learning
for efficient detection of sickle cells. DL techniques are used for
both feature extraction and classification of red blood cells from
blood smear microscopic images. The DL methods such as
convolutional neural networks and recurrent neural networks
have been shown to be very effective in extracting and
accurately classifying sickle cell disease medical images.
Mengjia Xu et al. [31] proposed a method based on
convolutional neural networks to classify red blood cells into
eight classes, namely discocytes, echinocytes, elongated,
granular, ovalocytes, reticulocytes, drepanocytes and
stomatocytes. In this study, the authors first extracted patches of
globules from different categories in the microscopic images.
The sizes of the extracted patches are normalized or a mask
image for each class is generated at the output. Then, a
convolutional neural network is created to classify the blood
cells. I the last step of this work, the authors analyzed the shape
factor of each type of red blood cell in order to evaluate the shape
parameters of the studied classes. This method gives an accuracy
of 87.50% and an area under the ROC curve (AUC) of 0.94.
However, it is important to note that to achieve even better
results, this method would require more precise segmentation
and training on a larger dataset.
Mo Zhang et al. [32] implemented a method for
simultaneous segmentation and classification of red blood cells
based on the U-Net architecture with the introduction of
deformable layers. This method aims to segment the blood cells
and classify them into three types: normal cells, sickle cells and
other types of cells. This method is able to efficiently segment
cells present in shaded areas of microscopic images. The results
showed that the proposed model is able to classify cells with
99% accuracy. The comparative evaluation also showed that this
method outperformed the standard U-Net approach and region
growing method in terms of semantic segmentation of sickle
cells. However, a noteworthy constraint in this work is the small
size of the training dataset used to train the model.
Alzubaidi et al. [33] proposed three deep learning models to
detect sickle cells from blood smear microscopic images. In this
study, the authors used a dataset consisting of 626 blood smear
images divided into three classes: 202 images of normal cells,
211 of sickle cells and 213 images composed of other cell
shapes. To address the issue of insufficient data, the authors
employed data augmentation techniques (flip, luminosity) and
transfer learning. The training model achieved a classification
accuracy of 99.98%.
In the study by B. Sen et al. [34], five pre-trained models
such as ResNet50, ResNet101, VGG16, VGG19, InceptionV3
were used to classify red blood cells into three categories:
normal cells, sickle cells and other cells types. The images used
in this method are collected from the erythrocyteIdb1[29]
dataset. Flipping data augmentation techniques were used to
enrich the training samples. From the results obtained, the
Inceptionv3 model obtains the best performance with a
classification accuracy of 91%, surpassing the ResNet50,
ResNet101, VGG16 and VGG19 models. We note that ResNet
and VGG require more training data to better classify cells than
InceptionV3, which explains their relatively low performance.
Another broader method of diagnosing hematological
diseases in order to improve patient care was proposed by
Karagül et al. [35]. The authors used convolutional neural
networks to classify 14 types of anemia. Around 1477 files of
patients diagnosed with anemic disorders were used in this
experiment. The Convolutional neural network (CNN) model
had an overall accuracy of 84.63% after 100 epochs.
Emmanuel G. Dada et al. [36] used deep learning techniques
to classify a patient's red blood cells into normal, sickle, and
neonatal cells. This study aims to lower the expenses associated
with sickle cell disease diagnosis by presenting a more costefficient approach. In this endeavor, five models built upon CNN
architecture were tested to identify sickle cell disease in
microscopic blood smear images. Using the applied data
augmentation techniques, the PCNN-15 and DAPN-48 models
achieved 99% and 100% accuracy ahead of the PCNN-48, VGG
19 and RestNet-50 models, respectively. Depending on the
geographical locale in which this investigation is undertaken, the
outcomes could wield substantial influence on the timely
detection of sickle cell disease and subsequently curtail the
financial resources earmarked for its therapeutic intervention.
P. Balamanikandan and al. [37] introduced an approach that
relies on mathematical modeling involving quantum graph
theory and a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) neural network
for discriminating between sickle cells and normal cells. This
technique aims to decrease the processing time and decisionmaking errors associated with the identification of sickle cell
disease in patients. The process starts with the use of a DNA
(Deoxyribonucleic Acid) sequence as input. The quantum graphtheory model is used to extract the characteristics of the elastic
properties of each sequence. A set of eight features is extracted,
and a spanning tree is generated to calculate the relational values.
Then, the LSTM neural network is used to classify normal cells
and sickle cells. The proposed DL model achieved a
classification accuracy of 99.12%, endorsing the model's
effectiveness.
Recent research findings show that DL models provide better
performance when it comes to blood cell detection and
classification tasks. [38].
Karunasena et al. [39] proposed a method for detecting sickle
cell cells based on the Region-based Convolutional Neural
Network (R-CNN) architecture. The given R-CNN architecture
comprises two stages, including a feature extraction step and a
classification step. CNN is applied for the extraction of relevant
features from sickle cells. Subsequently, the features extracted
from each region are fed into the SVM classifier to ascertain the
object's class to which that region pertains. In addition,
coordinates are estimated to enclose the object within the
detected region using a bounding box. In this approach, 150
sample blood smear images were used to train the CNN model.
The results indicated that the R-CNN network achieved 95.2%
accuracy in sickle cell detection.
Ihtisham et al. [40] developed a model that uses
convolutional neural networks, i.e. Faster R-CNN, to detect and
categorize blood cells through microscopic images. This
approach aims to automate the process of diagnosing
hematological diseases that affect blood cells. The proposed
model includes four steps: producing blood smears, collecting
microscopic blood smears, labelling images and training the
faster R-CNN model. The model is trained on annotated images
to predict three classes of cells by delimiting each one with a
bounding box. This method was compared with the manual SCD
diagnostic approach to evaluate its performance. According to
the results, the proposed model reaches up to 91.83%.
Maxime Darrin et al. [41] proposed a hybrid framework that
incorporates convolutional and recurrent neural networks
(RNN) layers to analyze video sequences of unbalanced red
blood cells in sickle cell disease patients. The video sequences
used were captured using a microscope and each video included
between 6 and 100 images. This hybrids model provides an
accuracy of 97%. The authors suggest that this research could be
advantageous for monitoring the health status of SCD patients.
Goswani et al. [42] proposed an AI method with the goal of
enhancing the manual identification and classification of sickle
cells. The proposed method relies on using the ResNet50 deep
learning model to accurately detect and categorize sickle cells
within microscopic images derived from blood samples of
patients with sickle cell disease. The trained ResNet50 model
achieved an impressive accuracy of 93.88% on the tested
dataset.
A comparative study was conducted by Kawuma Simon et
al. [38] to assess the accuracy and performance of the pre-trained
models employed in sickle cell disease detection. Experimental
tests are based on five pre-trained models including VGG16,
VGG19, Inception V3, RestNet50 and ReNet. All these models
were evaluated on the same dataset to classify normal cells and
sickle cells from a microscopic image of a blood smear. The
results show that the Inception V3 model is more suitable for the
classification of sickle cells, and it obtains an accuracy of 100%
ahead of the VGG16, VGG19, ResNet and ReNet models with
an accuracy of 99%, 97%, 82 and 67%, respectively. We can see
that the inceptionV3, VGG16, and VGG19 models yield good
results, even though the performance has improved due to the
increase in the number of filters. On the other hand, ResNet50
and ReNet models require more training data to learn more from
extracted features. The performance of the ResNet50 and ReNet
models could be improved by using a larger sickle cell dataset.
Niksa Praljak et al. [43] use deep learning to automate the
sickle cell counting process to facilitate the analysis of
microfluidic biomarker assay data. The given model was trained
on 107 images of microfluidic biomarkers from patients with
sickle cell disease. The model achieved an average uncertainty
of 3%, assessed through accuracy metrics on the test dataset.
Another recent study, using the U-Net model, was proposed
by Yasheng Chen et al. [44] for the detection of modular lesions
in children and young adults with sickle cell disease. The U-Net
model was trained on brain magnetic resonance images (MRI)
from these two categories of patients. The U-Net model predicts
the presence of a lesion with a sensitivity of 100% and an
accuracy of 74%. This study is conducted to facilitate the clinical
diagnosis of modular lesions.
Bhatia et al. [45] propose a new method based on a
personalized neural network to classify discocytes cells,
ovalocyte cells and sickle cells from microscopic images from
patients with sickle cell disease. Of the 428 microscopic images
collected, a dataset of 10,377 single-cell images was generated,
on which the model was trained. In this study, the model
achieved an accuracy of 81%. After comparison with the
LightGBM classifier, Inception V3, ResNet, VGG6-16, VGG-
19, ResNet-50, Fine-Tuned, DenseNet-121 and EfficientNetB0
models, the proposed model obtained the best accuracy.
Detection and classification of red blood cells from
microscopic images are crucial steps in the automatic diagnosis
of sickle cell disease. TABLE 1 highlights the performance,
advantages and limitations of some methods detailed above and
used by different researchers for the diagnosis of sickle cell
disease. In table 1, we summarize the studies carried out over the
last five years, which emphasis recent proposals related to the
detection and diagnosis of SCD. This table illustrates recent
advancements in enhancing sickle cell detection via image
segmentation, machine learning, and deep learning techniques.
It also underscores the constraints associated with each
approach.
In addition to the research summarized in this paper, TABLE
1 provides a non-comprehensive compilation of notable studies
underscoring the significance of advancements in sickle cell
disease diagnosis facilitated by artificial intelligence techniques.
The methods used by each author, the expectations in terms of
performance and the limits of each of these studies are well
described in TABLE 1. These various factors expedite our
ability to draw perspectives for our future research.
These limitations should motivate researchers to enhance
current methods and suggest systems for integration into thesickle cell disease diagnosis process. Some of these limitations
targeted here are widely discussed in section III and include the
morphological variability of sickle cells, the quality of
microscopic images, the treatment of overlapped cells, the lack
of clinical dataset, and the clinical validation of data labeling
process.
Besides reviewed proposals limitations, we propose paths to
explore future research topics that address challenges around
formulating effective strategies to address cell overlap in
images, the limited access to comprehensive annotated datasets
for researchers, and the integration of AI models into medical
concerns when it comes to sickle cell disease diagnosis.
TABLE I. PERFORMANCE, STRENGTHS, WEAKNESSES OF REVIEWED SICKLE CELL DETECTION METHODS
Years Methods Performances Strenghts Weaknesses
2015 Segmentation using
K-means [21]
Allow good detection and count
of sickle cells
Significant time reduction in features
extraction stage when training DL
algorithms
Not taking into account
overlapped cells in the sickle cells
identification stage
2016
GrayScale, edge
detection algorithm
[22]
Enable to accurately count the
percentage of cells on blood
smear image
Good refining ability to highlight
cell shape and edge from blood cell
image
Unable to process overlapping
cells.
2016
Watershed
segmentation
algorithm, KNN [24]
Detect blood cells with an
accuracy of 80.6% and a
sensitivity of 87.2%
Efficient to properly classify SCD
Fairly number of considered
features when training the
algorithm
2017 CHT and Watershed
algorithm [23]. Optimum execution time
Significant time reduction in features
extraction stage when training IA
models
Liable to lead to a false diagnosis
due to presence of leucocyte in
blood smear
2017 SCD detection using
CNN [31]
Allow SCD classification with an
accuracy of 89.2% and an
average AUC value of 0.97%
Make robustness in features
extraction and classification in SCD
diagnosis steps
Luck of accuracy when
overlapped cells. Any information
about the SCD stage
2017 Deformable U-Net
[32]
High accuracy performance of
99% when classifying singleclass red blood cells
Recommended to reduce noise on
image, fixed heterogeneous shapes
and overlapped cells
Does not access the number of
cells which has a significant rule
in SCD diagnosis
2020 CNN, transfer
learning [33] Accuracies up to 99%
Exhibit data augmentation and
transfer learning strength to improve
sickle cells classification
No pre-processing is done on the
images before the feature
extraction step and classification
2020 CNN, RestNet50
[43]
Robust detection ability even
with poor images conditions
Better sensitivity in contrast to
manual diagnostic method
Rely on a manually labeled
training dataset, which can
require considerable effort in
terms of time and human
resources
2021 SVM, KNN, RL, DT
and RF [27]
RF outperform with accuracy
result near 96% when it comes to
SCD detection
Highly recommended for good
precision when it comes to detect
blood disorder including thalassemia
The classes on which the
algorithms are trained are
unbalanced, which can lead to an
overfitting problem
2021 Classifier MLP [30] High SCD prediction accuracy of
99% Efficient to properly classify SCD Give any information about the
disease status
2021 Inceptionv3, ResNet
and VGG [34]
Inception V3 91% outperform
with prediction accuracy of 91%
Significantly reduce SCD diagnostic
processing time
Give any information about the
disease status
2021 RF, SVM, RL, NB
[25]
RF reaches better performance
with 92% of prediction accuracy
when classifying cells
Strong ability to accurately identify
cells type from blood smear image
Any comparison with similar
image segmentation methods to
validate its performance
2021 CNN-based SCD
deection [35]
Good prediction accuracy of
84.63%
Good prediction while managing
various types of anemia from blood
smear image
Any information about a potential
anemic disorder
2023
VGG19, RESNET-
50, PCNN-15,
PCNN-48 and
DAPN-48 [36]
PCNN-15 and DAPN-48 give
high average accuracy of 99.92%
in SCD detection
Boost efficiency to discern between
normal, neonatal and sickle cells
Any information about the type
and the stage of the disease
2023 Quantum graph
theory, LSTM [37] Good accuracy rate up to 99.12% Improve LSTM performances when
dealing with features elasticity
Precision can be improved.
High computing and memory cost
2023 CNN and RNN [41] Accuracy of 97% when
identifying sickle cells
Efficient identification ability to
analyze noisy microscopic cell
images from video sequences
2023 Inceptionv3, KNN
and SVM [28]
Good performances score related
to precision, accuracy,
sensitivity, specificity and F1
score of 99%, 98%, 99%, 98%
and 96% respectively
Good effectiveness to discriminate
normal cells to sickle cells from
blood smear
May need image processing step
to improve performance
2023 SCD detection using
R-CNN [39]
Good average accuracy of
95.20% with low error rate 0.5%
Good sensibility in sickle cells
identification ability among others
cells.
Can improve accuracy when help
RCNN algorithm to process
nested cells in the image
2023 Faster RCNN [40]
Suitable for hematological
diseases diagnosis with accuracy
near to 91.83%
Fit for hematological diseases
diagnosis
Unable to effectively detect
nested cells
2023 ResNet50 [42]
Good detection ability of 93.88%
when it comes to detect sickle
cells
Give highly contribution that help to
process overlapped cells
Used dataset is restricted in size
and diversity, which can
potentially affect model
sensitivity
2023
VGG16, VGG19,
InceptionV3, ResNet
and ReNet [38]
InceptionV3 gives efficient SCD
detection with an accuracy of
97.3%
Give significant in using deep
learning methods for the detection of
sickle cells

2023 U-Net-based SCD
detection [44]
U-Net showed 100% sensitivity
in predicting the presence of
SCD with an accuracy of 74%
Ability to identify with low error the
spinal cord lesions in children and
young with SCD
Although he recorded high
sensitivity, its low accuracy can
lead to a notable false positive
decision
2023
Custom Deep CNN
[45]
Custom Deep CNN outperform
with an accuracy of 81% when
classifying various erythrocyte
morphologies
Strong ability to accurately classify
various blood cells, even with
overlapping sickle cell
Luck of diversity in dataset
samples could affect the model's
ability to handle broader
morphological variations.
Model need to be validated with a
real-world clinical setting to
evaluate its reliability in SCD
diagnosis
III. DISCUSSION
The detection and accurate classification of sickle cells in
red blood cells is a difficult job in diagnosis due to the variety
and arrangement of cells in microscopic images. This study
shows that the application of image processing techniques and
Deep Learning methods could represent a promising way to
facilitate the detection of sickle cell disease from microscopic
images of blood smears. Despite the satisfactory results
provided by recent work (section 2), it remains challenging to
improve the accuracy of SCD detection and allow health experts
to integrate intelligent systems into the daily diagnosis of this
disease. This section outlines the challenges identified in this
investigation, which may serve as potential areas for future
research in the realm of sickle cell disease detection.
• The morphological variability of sickle cells: The
diverse morphologies of sickle cells, which vary with
the degree of anemia, can complicate the diagnosis.
Collaborating with health professionals to accurately
annotate cell images and categorize the various typical
forms of targeted cells in SCD diagnosis can be
undertaken. This work will make it possible to design
more precise SCD identification models that would help
doctors to better direct care based on anemia severity for
each patient.
• The quality of microscopic images: Microscopic images
may exhibit noise and artifacts due to equipment quality
and image capture conditions. Indeed, the image aspect
can make cell segmentation and therefore detection
more complex and degrade the learning performance of
models. A pre-processing step incorporating more
efficient denoising and image enhancement techniques
can be used beforehand to further improve the quality of
an image. Hence, improved images can aid in extracting
more salient features that enhance the performance of
models for sickle cell detection.
• Treatment of overlapped cells: Effective processing of
overlapping cells still remains one of the major
challenges in the accurate classification of sickle cells in
microscopic images. Blood cells frequently overlap and
therefore complicate segmentation and classification
tasks on image. Investigating advanced techniques using
neural network architectures like Vision Transformers
[46] and deeper models may be advantageous for
enhancing the segmentation of overlapped cells.
• Datasets: Standard datasets, such as erythrocytes IDB
[29], are limited in size and diversity. For better
performance, more comprehensive and diverse data
collection initiatives, involving actual blood cell images
obtained from healthcare facilities, could be pursued.
Nevertheless, ethical and confidentiality concerns must
be carefully considered.
• Clinical validation and generality of SCD detection
models: One of the key challenges involves the
development of standardized clinical protocols to assess
the real-world efficacy of AI models in clinical practice.
This entails gathering a collection of comprehensive and
accurate medical datasets from patients with SCD as
well as the creation of standard diagnostic criteria.
Furthermore, it is crucial to conduct comparisons
between the performance of AI models to that oftraditional clinical approaches, while enforcing the
reliability and reproducibility of results. The clinical
validation should encompass a diverse range of patient
populations, all while respecting specific ethical and
data confidentiality concerns.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Sickle cell disease, also called sickle cell anemia, is one of
the most common genetic diseases worldwide. Despite notable
progress in symptom management, SCD remains still incurable.
This paper offers an outline of recent developments in SCD
detection through artificial intelligence techniques. We explore
both image processing methods, machine learning and deep
learning approaches aimed at enhancing the identification of
sickle cells in microscopic blood smear images. Reviewed
methods performances, strengths and limitations are discussed
to highlight challengers and potential research paths to explore.
The key challenges include frequently pertain to devising
effective approaches for handling cell overlap in images, the
restricted availability of extensive annotated datasets for
researchers, and AI model integration in SCD diagnosis.
In addition, the issue of generalizing AI models in the diagnosis
of SCD is paramount, given the global prevalence of this
autosomal genetic condition. Subsequent research endeavors
should aim to create an intelligent, real-time automated system
for the abnormal cells detection and enumeration to support
diagnostic and treatment decisions for sickle cell disease. Such
a system could lead to a faster, more accurate, less expensive and
more efficient process, while ensuring continuous monitoring of
sickle cell patients.
REFERENCES
[1] G. J. Kato et al., « Sickle cell disease », Nat. Rev. Dis.
Primer, vol. 4, no 1, Art. no 1, mars 2018, doi:
10.1038/nrdp.2018.10.
[2] V. M. Ingram, « Abnormal human haemoglobins: I. The
comparison of normal human and sickle-cell
haemoglobins by “fingerprinting” », Biochim. Biophys.
Acta, vol. 28, p. 539‑545, janv. 1958, doi: 10.1016/0006-
3002(58)90516-X.
[3] S. J. Edelstein, J. N. Telford, et R. H. Crepeau,
« Structure of Fibers of Sickle Cell Hemoglobin », Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci., vol. 70, no 4, p. 1104‑1107, avr. 1973,
doi: 10.1073/pnas.70.4.1104.
[4] R. E. Benesch, S. Kwong, et R. Benesch, « The effects of
α chain mutations cis and trans to the β6 mutation on the
polymerization of sickle cell haemoglobin », Nature, vol.
299, no 5880, Art. no 5880, sept. 1982, doi:
10.1038/299231a0.
[5] « Sickle cell anemia - Symptoms & causes - Mayo
Clinic ». Consulté le: 21 août 2023. [En ligne].
Disponible sur: https://bit.ly/3s0D1vE
[6] P. L. Kavanagh, T. A. Fasipe, et T. Wun, « Sickle Cell
Disease: A Review », JAMA, vol. 328, no 1, p. 57‑68,
juill. 2022, doi: 10.1001/jama.2022.10233.
[7] « Protocol for “Genetic composition of sickle cell disease
in the Arab population: A systematic review” - Ata - 2022
- Health Science Reports - Wiley Online Library ».
Consulté le: 21 août 2023. [En ligne]. Disponible sur:
https://bit.ly/3rK3NZp
[8] K. L. Hassell, « Population Estimates of Sickle Cell
Disease in the U.S. », Am. J. Prev. Med., vol. 38, no 4,
Supplement, p. S512‑S521, avr. 2010, doi:
10.1016/j.amepre.2009.12.022.
[9] D. C. Rees, T. N. Williams, et M. T. Gladwin, « Sicklecell disease », The Lancet, vol. 376, no 9757, p.
2018‑2031, déc. 2010, doi: 10.1016/S0140-
6736(10)61029-X.
[10] D. Boiro et al., « Drépanocytose chez l’enfant. Profils
clinique et évolutif à propos de 138 cas suivis au Service
de Pédiatrie de l’Hôpital Abass Ndao de Dakar », Med
Afr Noire En Ligne, p. 326‑332, 2016.
[11] « A59_9-en.pdf ». Consulté le: 21 août 2023. [En ligne].
Disponible sur: https://bit.ly/3RZBpgf
[12] M. González-Hidalgo, F. A. Guerrero-Peña, S. HeroldGarcía, A. Jaume-I-Capó, et P. D. Marrero-Fernández,
« Red blood cell cluster separation from digital images
for use in sickle cell disease », IEEE J. Biomed. Health
Inform., vol. 19, no 4, p. 1514‑1525, juill. 2015, doi:
10.1109/JBHI.2014.2356402.
[13] H. Ceelie, R. B. Dinkelaar, et W. van Gelder,
« Examination of peripheral blood films using automated
microscopy; evaluation of Diffmaster Octavia and
Cellavision DM96 », J. Clin. Pathol., vol. 60, no 1, p.
72‑79, janv. 2007, doi: 10.1136/jcp.2005.035402.
[14] D. A. Diallo et al., « Dépistage néonatal ciblé de la
drépanocytose : limites du test de falciformation (test
d’Emmel) dans le bilan prénatal en zone ouest
africaine », Rev. DÉpidémiologie Santé Publique, vol.
66, no 3, p. 181‑185, mai 2018, doi:
10.1016/j.respe.2018.02.007.
[15] J. Ford, « Red blood cell morphology », Int. J. Lab.
Hematol., vol. 35, no 3, p. 351‑357, 2013, doi:
10.1111/ijlh.12082.
[16] S. Ouedraogo, M. Bousso, A. Balde, O. Sall, C. Sall, et
M. Soumboundou, « Automating Sickle Cell Counting
Using Object Detection Techniques », in Pan-African
Artificial Intelligence and Smart Systems, T. M.
Ngatched Nkouatchah, I. Woungang, J.-R. Tapamo, et S.
Viriri, Éd., in Lecture Notes of the Institute for Computer
Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications
Engineering. Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland, 2023,
p. 224‑236. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-25271-6_14.
[17] F.-G. Yuan, S. A. Zargar, Q. Chen, et S. Wang,
« Machine learning for structural health monitoring:
challenges and opportunities », in Sensors and Smart
Structures Technologies for Civil, Mechanical, and
Aerospace Systems 2020, SPIE, avr. 2020, p. 1137903.
doi: 10.1117/12.2561610.
[18] M. M. Taye, « Understanding of Machine Learning with
Deep Learning: Architectures, Workflow, Applications
and Future Directions », Computers, vol. 12, no 5, Art. no
5, mai 2023, doi: 10.3390/computers12050091.[19] « Journal of Clinical Medicine | An Open Access Journal
from MDPI ». Consulté le: 28 septembre 2023. [En
ligne]. Disponible sur: https://bit.ly/3M2LPIt
[20] A. A. Elsabagh et al., « Artificial intelligence in sickle
disease », Blood Rev., vol. 61, p. 101102, sept. 2023, doi:
10.1016/j.blre.2023.101102.
[21] M. Sahu, A. K. Biswas, et K. Uma, « Detection of Sickle
Cell Anemia in Red Blood Cell: A Review », Int. J. Eng.
Appl. Sci., vol. 2, no 3, p. 257975, mars 2015.
[22] P. I. A. Chintawar, A. Mishra, P. Narnaware, et C.
Kuhikar, « Detection of Sickle Cells using Image
Processing », 2016. Consulté le: 22 août 2023. [En ligne].
Disponible sur: https://bit.ly/3rQnT3Z
[23] M. Abdulraheem Fadhel, A. J. Humaidi, et S. R. Oleiwi,
« Image processing-based diagnosis of sickle cell anemia
in erythrocytes », in 2017 Annual Conference on New
Trends in Information & Communications Technology
Applications (NTICT), mars 2017, p. 203‑207. doi:
10.1109/NTICT.2017.7976124.
[24] V. Sharma, A. Rathore, et G. Vyas, « Detection of sickle
cell anaemia and thalassaemia causing abnormalities in
thin smear of human blood sample using image
processing », in 2016 International Conference on
Inventive Computation Technologies (ICICT), août 2016,
p. 1‑5. doi: 10.1109/INVENTIVE.2016.7830136.
[25] B. Sen, A. Ganesh, A. Bhan, S. Dixit, et A. Goyal,
« Machine learning based Diagnosis and Classification
Of Sickle Cell Anemia in Human RBC », in 2021 Third
International Conference on Intelligent Communication
Technologies and Virtual Mobile Networks (ICICV),
févr. 2021, p. 753‑758. doi:
10.1109/ICICV50876.2021.9388610.
[26] A. Mohamad, R. Hamzah, A. Mokhtar, et J. Sathar,
« Sickle cell disease verification via sobel edge
algorithms for image processing », sept. 2017, p. 1‑4. doi:
10.1109/ICE2T.2017.8215994.
[27] S. Yeruva, B. P. Gowtham, Y. H. Chandana, M. S.
Varalakshmi, et S. Jain, « Prediction of Anemia Disease
Using Classification Methods », in Machine Learning
Technologies and Applications, C. K. Mai, A. B. Reddy,
et K. S. Raju, Éd., in Algorithms for Intelligent Systems.
Singapore: Springer, 2021, p. 1‑11. doi: 10.1007/978-
981-33-4046-6_1.
[28] A. S, K. Ganesan, et B. B. K, « A novel deep learning
approach for sickle cell anemia detection in human RBCs
using an improved wrapper-based feature selection
technique in microscopic blood smear images », Biomed.
Eng. Biomed. Tech., vol. 68, no 2, p. 175‑185, avr. 2023,
doi: 10.1515/bmt-2021-0127.
[29] Consulté le: 22 août 2023. [En ligne]. Disponible sur:
http://erythrocytesidb.uib.es/
[30] S. Yeruva, M. S. Varalakshmi, B. P. Gowtham, Y. H.
Chandana, et P. K. Prasad, « Identification of Sickle Cell
Anemia Using Deep Neural Networks », Emerg. Sci. J.,
vol. 5, no 2, Art. no 2, avr. 2021, doi: 10.28991/esj-2021-
01270.
[31] M. Xu, D. P. Papageorgiou, S. Z. Abidi, M. Dao, H.
Zhao, et G. E. Karniadakis, « A deep convolutional
neural network for classification of red blood cells in
sickle cell anemia », PLoS Comput. Biol., vol. 13, no 10,
p. e1005746, oct. 2017, doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005746.
[32] M. Zhang, X. Li, M. Xu, et Q. Li, « Image Segmentation
and Classification for Sickle Cell Disease using
Deformable U-Net ». arXiv, 29 octobre 2017. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.1710.08149.
[33] L. Alzubaidi, M. A. Fadhel, O. Al-Shamma, J. Zhang, et
Y. Duan, « Deep Learning Models for Classification of
Red Blood Cells in Microscopy Images to Aid in Sickle
Cell Anemia Diagnosis », Electronics, vol. 9, no 3, Art.
no 3, mars 2020, doi: 10.3390/electronics9030427.
[34] B. Sen, A. Ganesh, A. Bhan, et S. Dixit, « “Deep
Learning based diagnosis of sickle cell anemia in human
RBC” », in 2021 2nd International Conference on
Intelligent Engineering and Management (ICIEM), avr.
2021, p. 526‑529. doi:
10.1109/ICIEM51511.2021.9445293.
[35] T. Karagül, N. Yurtay, et B. Öneç, « Diagnosing
Hematological Disorders Using Deep Learning
Method », Sak. Univ. J. Comput. Inf. Sci., vol. 4, no 2,
Art. no 2, août 2021, doi: 10.35377/saucis.04.02.836375.
[36] E. G. Dada, D. O. Oyewola, et S. B. Joseph, « Deep
Convolutional Neural Network Model for Detection of
Sickle Cell Anemia in Peripheral Blood Images »,
Commun. Phys. Sci., vol. 8, no 1, Art. no 1, mars 2022,
Consulté le: 22 août 2023. [En ligne]. Disponible sur:
https://bit.ly/45uRGNt
[37] « A mathematical modelling to detect sickle cell anemia
using Quantum graph theory and Aquila optimization
classifier ». Consulté le: 22 août 2023. [En ligne].
Disponible sur: https://bit.ly/3M0Ru1r
[38] « Comparison of Deep Learning Techniques in Detection
of Sickle Cell Disease | Artificial Intelligence and
Applications ». Consulté le: 22 août 2023. [En ligne].
Disponible sur: https://bit.ly/46MQt5c
[39] G. M. K. B. Karunasena, K. Herath, H. Priyankara, et A.
Madhusanka, « Sickle Cell Disease Identification by
Using Region with Convolutional Neural Networks (RCNN) and Digital Image Processing », vol. 1, p. 1‑08,
janv. 2023.
[40] I. ul Haq, S. Anwar, M. T. Khan, et U. Sadique, « An
Intelligent Approach for Blood Cell Detection
Employing Faster RCNN », Pak. J. Eng. Technol., vol. 6,
no 1, Art. no 1, janv. 2023, doi: 10.51846/vol6iss1pp1-6.
[41] M. Darrin et al., « Classification of red cell dynamics
with convolutional and recurrent neural networks: a
sickle cell disease case study », Sci. Rep., vol. 13, no 1,
Art. no 1, janv. 2023, doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-27718-w.
[42] N. G. Goswami, A. Goswami, N. Sampathila, et G. M.
Bairy, « Sickle Cell Classification Using Deep
Learning », in 2023 3rd International Conference on
Intelligent Technologies (CONIT), juin 2023, p. 1‑6. doi:
10.1109/CONIT59222.2023.10205802.[43] N. Praljak et al., « A Deep Learning Framework for
Sickle Cell Disease Microfluidic Biomarker Assays »,
Blood, vol. 136, no Supplement 1, p. 15‑16, nov. 2020,
doi: 10.1182/blood-2020-141693.
[44] Y. Chen et al., « Toward Automated Detection of Silent
Cerebral Infarcts in Children and Young Adults With
Sickle Cell Anemia », Stroke, vol. 54, no 8, p. 2096‑2104,
août 2023, doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.123.042683.
[45] M. Bhatia et al., « A Novel Deep Learning based Model
for Erythrocytes Classification and Quantification in
Sickle Cell Disease ». arXiv, 2 mai 2023. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2305.01663.
[46] F. Hörst et al., « CellViT: Vision Transformers for
Precise Cell Segmentation and Classification ». arXiv, 6
octobre 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2306.15350.